---
title: Common Passwords
challenge: 287
---
<h2 id="task-1">
Task 1: Strong Password
</h2>
**Submitted by: Mohammad Sajid Anwar**

---
You are given a string, `$str`.

Write a program to return the minimum number of steps required to make the given string very strong password. If it is already strong then return 0.

Criteria:
- It must have at least 6 characters.
- It must contains at least one lowercase letter, at least one upper case letter
and at least one digit.
- It shouldn't contain 3 repeating characters in a row.

Following can be considered as one step:

- Insert one character
- Delete one character
- Replace one character with another

### Example 1
```
Input: $str = "a"
Output: 5
```
### Example 2
```
Input: $str = "aB2"
Output: 3
```
### Example 3
```
Input: $str = "PaaSW0rd"
Output: 0
```
### Example 4
```
Input: $str = "Paaasw0rd"
Output: 1
```
### Example 5
```
Input: $str = "aaaaa"
Output: 3
```
---
### Solution

We may calculate three measures that give the number of steps that have to be performed such that the corresponding criterion is satisfied:
- The number of characters below the minimum length.
- The number of missing character classes.
- The number of changes to break all groups of three repeated characters.

With a single step, more than one measure may be reduced:
- Inserting a character increments the string length _and_ introduces a new character class.
- Changing a character breaks a series of up to five repeated characters _and_ introduces a new character class.

The only anomaly here is a string made of a sequence of five repeated characters:
- Changing one character breaks the sequence but does not extend the string.
- Inserting one character extends the string but doesn't break the sequence.

But such a string consists of only one character class and thus two steps are required anyway.

Thus the maximum over all three measures gives the required number of steps in all cases.

```perl
use strict;
use warnings;
use experimental 'signatures'
use List::Util qw(reduce max);

sub strong_password ($str) {
    max +(length($str) < 6 ? 6 - length($str) : 0),
         (3 - grep {eval "\$str =~ tr/$_//"} qw(a-z A-Z 0-9)),
         (reduce {$a + int length($b) / 3} 0, $str =~ /((.)\2{2,})/g);
}
```

See the [full solution]({{ page.solution_url }}/challenge-{{ page.challenge }}/jo-37/perl/ch-1.pl) to task 1.

<!--
See [discussion](https://github.com/jo-37/the-bears-den/issues/XXX
-->

<h2 id="task-2">
Task 2: Valid Number
</h2>
**Submitted by: Mohammad Sajid Anwar**

---
You are given a string, `$str`.

Write a script to find if it is a valid number.

Conditions for a valid number:

- An integer number followed by an optional exponent.
- A decimal number followed by an optional exponent.
- An integer number is defined with an optional sign `-` or `+` followed by digits.

Decimal Number:

A decimal number is defined with an optional sign `-` or `+` followed by one of the following definitions:
- Digits followed by a dot `.`.
- Digits followed by a dot `.` followed by digits.
- A dot `.` followed by digits.

Exponent:

- An exponent is defined with an exponent notation `e` or `E` followed by an integer number.

### Example 1
```
Input: $str = "1"
Output: true
```
### Example 2
```
Input: $str = "a"
Output: false
```
### Example 3
```
Input: $str = "."
Output: false
```
### Example 4
```
Input: $str = "1.2e4.2"
Output: false
```
### Example 5
```
Input: $str = "-1."
Output: true
```
### Example 6
```
Input: $str = "+1E-8"
Output: true
```
### Example 7
```
Input: $str = ".44"
Output: true
```
---
### Solution
This task is what `Regex::Common` was made for.

```perl
use strict;
use warnings;
use Regexp::Common;

sub valid_number {
	shift =~ /^$RE{num}{real}\z/;
}
```
See the [full solution]({{ page.solution_url }}/challenge-{{ page.challenge }}/jo-37/perl/ch-2.pl) to task 2.

<!--
See [discussion](https://github.com/jo-37/the-bears-den/issues/XXX
-->
