---
title: Or Is It Reshaped?
challenge: 324
---
<h2 id="task-1">
Task 1: 2D Array
</h2>
**Submitted by: Mohammad Sajid Anwar**

---
You are given an array of integers and two integers `$r` and `$c`.

Write a script to create two dimension array having `$r` rows and `$c` columns using the given array.

### Example 1
```
Input: @ints = (1, 2, 3, 4), $r = 2, $c = 2
Output: ([1, 2], [3, 4])
```
### Example 2
```
Input: @ints = (1, 2, 3), $r = 1, $c = 3
Output: ([1, 2, 3])
```
### Example 3
```
Input: @ints = (1, 2, 3, 4), $r = 4, $c = 1
Output: ([1], [2], [3], [4])
```
---
### Solution
Using [`PDL`](https://metacpan.org/pod/PDL)'s
[`reshape`](https://metacpan.org/pod/PDL::Core#reshape) method, this task can easily be solved.

This works even if the product `$r * $c` does not match the number of elements in the array.
The result will be truncated or filled with zeroes accordingly.

```perl
use strict;
use warnings;
use experimental 'signatures';
use PDL;

sub two_d_array ($r, $c, @ints) {
    pdl(@ints)->reshape($c, $r);
}
```
See the [full solution]({{ page.solution_url }}/challenge-{{ page.challenge }}/jo-37/perl/ch-1.pl) to task 1.

<!--
See [discussion](https://github.com/jo-37/the-bears-den/issues/XXX
-->

<h2 id="task-2">
Task 2: Total XOR
</h2>
**Submitted by: Mohammad Sajid Anwar**

---
You are given an array of integers.

Write a script to return the sum of total XOR for every subset of given array.

### Example 1
```
Input: @ints = (1, 3)
Output: 6

Subset [1],    total XOR = 1
Subset [3],    total XOR = 3
Subset [1, 3], total XOR => 1 XOR 3 => 2

Sum of total XOR => 1 + 3 + 2 => 6
```
### Example 2
```
Input: @ints = (5, 1, 6)
Output: 28

Subset [5],       total XOR = 5
Subset [1],       total XOR = 1
Subset [6],       total XOR = 6
Subset [5, 1],    total XOR => 5 XOR 1 => 4
Subset [5, 6],    total XOR => 5 XOR 6 => 3
Subset [1, 6],    total XOR => 1 XOR 6 => 7
Subset [5, 1, 6], total XOR => 5 XOR 1 XOR 6 => 2

Sum of total XOR => 5 + 1 + 6 + 4 + 3 + 7 + 2 => 28
```
### Example 3
```
Input: @ints = (3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8)
Output: 480
```
---
### Solution
#### Preliminary Considerations
There is a little ambiguity in this task that may lead to significantly different results.

We are given an _array_ of integers and shall iterate over the _subsets_ thereof.
No definition for _subsets of an array_ is given and I'm not aware of any, so I have to make assumptions.
There are several ways to define _subsets of an array_.
I'll give some examples and show the results on the array `(1, 1, 1)`.
1. [_Subsets_](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Subset) are parts of
[_sets_](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Set_(mathematics)): unordered collections of unique items. Applying this concept to the example array leads to two _subsets_ $$\{\emptyset, \{1\}\}$$ and a total `XOR` sum of $$1$$.
2. We may look at the array as a [_multiset_](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Multiset) and iterate over _submultisets_ thereof. Here we find the submultisets $$\{\emptyset, [1], [1, 1], [1, 1, 1]\}$$ and a total `XOR` sum of $$2$$.
3. We may iterate over _index subsets_. These are well-defined as the indices of an array form a proper set. Then we use _array slices_ as the "subsets". Though this interpretation might look a bit strange from a mathematical point of view, it is exactly what we get when using e.g.
[`Math::Prime::Util`](https://metacpan.org/pod/Math::Prime::Util)'s
[`forcomb`](https://metacpan.org/pod/Math::Prime::Util#forcomb) function:  
```sh
$ perl -Mntheory=:all -E '@i = (1) x 3; forcomb {say "(@i[@_])"} @i'
()
(1)
(1)
(1)
(1 1)
(1 1)
(1 1)
(1 1 1)
```
with a total `XOR` sum of $$4$$.

For now I'll ignore this issue and presume the integers to be distinct.
In this case all three interpretations lead to the same result.
See [Generalization](#generalization).

#### Calculating the total `XOR` sum
At first glance this task looks expensive, but it isn't.
Interestingly, we neither need to iterate over subsets, nor do we need to perform an `XOR` operation at all.

We may look at the task from a different angle and consider a single bit position $$i$$ within the elements of the subsets.
We may count the number of subsets where the `XOR` over its elements has a `1` at position $$i$$.
To this end we should count the number $$b_i$$ of integers having a `1` at bit position $$i$$ and apply some combinatorics to get the number $$o_i$$ of subsets having an odd number of `1`'s at position
$$i$$.

Then the total `XOR` sum would be $$\sum_{i=0}^k o_i 2^i$$, iterating over bit positions instead of subsets.

But things get even better!
It turns out that the number $$o_i$$ doesn't depend much on the number $$b_i$$.
In fact, either there is no such subset - when none of the given integers has a `1` at bit position
$$i$$ -
or there are $$2^{n - 1}$$ such subsets (with $$n$$ as the number of given integers).

To see this, let's assume there is at least one integer $$p$$ having a `1` at bit position $$i$$.
We can build the power set of the integers with $$p$$ excluded.
There are $$2^{n - 1}$$ sets in this power set.
With each set from the power set we either keep it as-is if it has an odd number of `1`'s at position
$$i$$, or we add the previously excluded $$p$$ to the subset turning the number of `1`'s to odd.
The thus constructed set has $$2^{n - 1}$$ elements and contains exactly all subsets with an odd number of `1`'s at position $$i$$.

The opposite case when there is no integer having a `1` at bit position $$i$$ set is trivial.

The bit positions where at least one integer has a `1` can be found by taking the bit-wise `OR` over the given integers.
Multiplied with $$2^{n - 1}$$ it gives the total `XOR` sum.

#### Generalization
Having found an efficient way to calculate the total `XOR` sum, we may come back to the initial issue: What are the subsets of an array?

It turns out that our approach has the same subset interpretation as
[`forcomb`](https://metacpan.org/pod/Math::Prime::Util#forcomb).
For the sake of convenience we simply choose the third interpretation for this task and are done.

#### Implementation
For large arrays (more than 32 `long` integers) an implementation `use`'ing `bigint` would be required.

```perl
use strict;
use warnings;
use PDL;

sub total_xor {
    longlong(@_)->bor->shiftleft(@_ - 1);
}
```

See the [full solution]({{ page.solution_url }}/challenge-{{ page.challenge }}/jo-37/perl/ch-2.pl) to task 2.

<!--
See [discussion](https://github.com/jo-37/the-bears-den/issues/XXX
-->
